Let all mouths open today for talk of good (theology), and let every word sing the Word of God shining from the heavens. Let every tongue preach, every soul rejoice, all earth sing:
 for today the words of light lighten up the son of light. Let the earthly agree with the heavenly, let that which is seen in the world sing together with the powers beyond the heaven: for since the truth has revealed itself and the King of heaven came, all should take part in the common confession of the Lord. The coming of Christ, the grace of all universe. The coming of Christ, freedom for all the world. Christ is being praised (sung), and the world is enlightened. Christ is being preached, and every soul is being dressed with heavenly love. The temptation of the things is witness to me for the word.

I see (lit. it is visible to me) the magnificent church order, I see the heavenly unextinguishable candle, I see the bodily nature aiming to the angelic liturgy. The fathers being from earth, and living on earth, and feeding from earth, are competing with the heavenly: this is how the church of God is. It resides on earth, but it has the rank of heavenly things. What is the work of angels in the heavens? To serve God. What is the work of those similar on earth? To praise (lit. sing) God. Theirs is in this way the same honor and worthiness. Because of this the blissful David, when striking his spiritual lyre, and preaching the salvation of theology, says in the song, as this he sings: Restore us, Oh God, and reveal Your face, that we may be saved.

. Not yet did the King come, and the forerunners were preaching the kingdom: The shepherd of Israel, says. Talk, prophet, clearly (lit. in the light), and say, explain what you preach. For many are shepherds: Moses is a shepherd, Aaron is a shepherd: you led, he says, your people with the hand of Moses and Aaron. A shepherd is David: he chose, he says, David, and His servant, to lead Israel, His inheritance. What therefore is the name of the shepherd you hide the worthiness? Explain clearly. Benevolent and unconfounded receive the voice of the preacher. He says: Oh shepherd of Israel, hear us, who leads Joseph like a flock. Here it is said shepherd, not yet the preached worthiness, since it is homonymous to other shepherds.

What therefore? Did you already understand this worthiness? I will reveal the truth to you. Oh You, seated on the cherubs, shine forth, rallying Your might, and come to save us. Do you see how all the preached worthiness was revealed? Do you see how to the royal and otherwordly throne of the King glory brought forth Jesus? So also the Saviour, confirming in this way the name of the prophet, crying out with the gospel’s grace: I am a good shepherd. For it is said that rationally (lit. with words) you will not know God, but like unrational sheep will you know the shepherd.

And the prophet wanting to show the fruit of the coming of the Shepherd: rally your might, says he, and come to save us. For the appearance of the Savior is the source of all grace. For the Redeemer of the universe has appeared, taking all into himself, of corresponding grace. As he sees all, that are in heavens, fallen, and the clergy, given to Israel, and the prophecies all excellent. It renews with Itself its gifts. And how? Listen.

There is (lit. can be) a prophet, since the prophecy was corrupted from the unworthy, as it is written: a prophet will be put forward by God the Lord from among your brothers, like me. There is an apostle and bishop like it is said: Look at the apostle and bishop of your calling Jesus. There is also a priest, as the hymnographer says: You are a priest forever in the order of Melchizedek. There is also a brother and servant, as the valiant Paul says: that he might be firstborn among many brothers and again for I say , he says, Christ to be servant through circumcision, so as to confirm the promises of the Fathers . For everybody comes in rank, and there can be also a reader: let us receive Isaiah, he reads, like the Gospel says and the prophetic voices announce, and respects the offering altar of the church. There was also a king of kings, as Nathanael says: Rabbi, You are the Son of God, You are the King of Israel .

But maybe someone says from the present standing: for what is to me the people, if with prophecies and apostleship and priestership dressed? What is to me, part of the peoples’ rank? For even more for all men there was a man who loves men. If you want him also as part of the people to see for your sake, judge for yourself and see the wanting to speak. For is it not a matter of confession, the baptizing in the land of the priest, who baptizes in the rank of people? For look at John, who baptized in the rank of priest, and baptized Christ in the rank of people. For today, brothers, today, as we executing the handling (oikonomia) of the waters, we don’t make holy from the water, but give holiness to the waters. And John, executing the habit of the priest, begins, and the Redeemer of the universe being baptized in the water to John, of the baptized in Spirit, the King to the Forerunner, God to the prophet. He? did not understand the worthiness of the handling, the bodily habit didn’t confuse him, he wasn’t tempted by the invisible power of the visible form , which preaches to the ignorant. For he is a holy lamp, a divine lamp, about him it is said : I prepared a lamp to My Christ , said by the prophet. For a lamp is named John, not thorough God’s words, to the true light, for there is a use to the lamp: for it is a righteous sun. But because he recognized God in the body of the baptized one, as in the night, of the Jewish order of things, shining the light of godly words. He is called the lamp rightfully.

And see the divine, brothers. When he came to the bodily handling (oikonomia), for the despot has come to us, he was a man for the sake of love of men, and a strange miracle: God in the man, in the slave a despot, the creator with the creations, the sanctifier with the sanctified. Then John preached the worthiness and the terrifying and glorious miracle: lamp receiving the righteous sun. For the Lord who redeems everybody is baptised by a man who needs redemption , not with the daring of supremacy, but in serving the command. For it was then, that two prophetic voices came together: the voice crying in the wilderness, and the voice in the waters. A true preacher praises and the God of glory thunders. And there was the venerable Trinity, lightening its glory. The Father from high preaching the Son, the Son below executing the godly handling, the Spirit sealing the godly sacrament. And there was a voice then witnessing high to the Father of the Only Begotten, like the heavens opened: for Jesus went out of the water, the heavens opened: for it was not endured the voice of such witnessing, the terrifying godly handling.

But see the miraculous: this voice opened the heavens, but the heretics were not afraid. This is my beloved Son, listen to Him . Because the law anticipated by preaching, and the prophets annunciating, so that no one with the first state of Jewish service, thrusting away the yoke of the grace of the gospel. The godly voice thinks the same from great worthiness. Listen to Him . To Him, who revealed, as Christ: for Christ is the fulfillment of the Law, Jesus is the fulfillment of the virtuous. For if the blessing of the law was apprehended, but there was no fulfillment, for the? waiting for our Lord, about Him did the miraculous Paul say: for Christ is the fulfillment of the Law. If you want, from the things clearly I will present to you the truth, proof of what was said. Listen precisely. Moses the law-giver ordered to divide into twelve tribes of Jerusalem and six of these tribes to go up to Mount Gebal six to Mount Garizim, and ordered to the ones to bless, and to the others to curse: to bless the ones who keep right the law, and to curse those who disobey. What therefore? Of all curses there was a seal: for the Levites say: cursed is the one who leaves the Law of the Lord. And all the people say Amen. And to each commandment follows but amin to the curses. About the blessing say the Levites: blessed are the ones keeping the Law of the Lord, blessed in the field, blessed in the city, blessed in the battle and no amen on any of the blessed. What therefore, the curses receive a seal, the blessing doesn’t receive the seal. What therefore wants the composition? What does the foretelling say? If I will be strong, I will try to come through, winged by your love: for an accusation of the curse was the fulfilling law, an annunciation the sanctioning Jesus. Was unfulfilled blessing because it was fitting the law to be given by the law, and to keep the gospel’s grace. For the sake of this were the blessings, since they were looking for the addition of amen .

Words and so that no one thinks that the grace is forced, but moreover, witnessing from the very truth , hear the wise Paul, who says: Our Lord Jesus Christ was not in him yes and now, but all in him was yes. For how many promises of God are in him, they are yes. And itself for amen to the glory of God . From here the said things are to be understood from the apostle himself: when dead in sins and with our uncircumcision in flesh, with Himself he made us alive. He forgave us all sins, cancelled the handwriting. Because all handwritings is sanctioned by the dictation of the law-writer and the signature of the borrower, and when, and where and how it was. They have that foretold guilt, since the law negating the curses, the amen of the people that signed, was heard. Jesus was fulfilled with blessings, appeared in Jordan, and the prophecy of Isaiah was fulfilled. For Isaiah said: let the deserts of Jordan rejoice, as the glory of Lebanon is given to her and the honor of Carmel. The word is unclear, but appeared with the grace of God.

Lebanon says the scripture of Jerusalem here, and don’t think the word is forced. Ezekiel is witnessing about the King Nabuchadnezar, saying: a great eagle, large-winged, spread-winged and full of claws came to Lebanon and took the chosen of the cedar of Lebanon and took it away to Babylon. But who was the chosen? Because Sedek tied the king, Joachim, and the priests and the bishops: this was the chosen of Lebanon, and took to Babylon, this is what is said, that the glory of Lebanon was given to her. Because the priesthood of Jerusalem and the prophecies all came to John, and all of Jerusalem, having left the offering, came out to take the baptism of John. And anticipating the prophet says about the deserts of Jordan, the glory of Lebanon was given to her and the honour of Carmel. And which honor? Hear, in passing. Elijah was the honor of Carmel: for Elijah was a prophet in Carmel. And since John came with the spirit and power of Elijah, that’s why this is said: given was the honour of Carmel in the desert. For John was the new Elijah in the desert, about him the Saviour says: if you want to receive, here is Elijah, who wanted to come. For Elijah lived once in the desert, but now John precisely says: the glory of Lebanon was given to her and the honor of Carmel.

For now, beloved ones, the glory didn’t not fulfill only the desert, but all the universe: for today there are on all the earth songs and theology. From the evening until now people are standing, having with songs won the song (sleep?), and the grace revealed itself, and the nature not being disgraced. And further in details (clearly). For as the iron is united with fire, if it was, not for anybody appears, but if it wasn’t, it is dressed, not putting aside the nature, but receiving light in the nature, so we, being worthy of the Holy Spirit, are casting away the bodily and are being dressed with graceful action. The standing church is shining all night, and what is said about her is being fulfilled: there was evening, and there was morning, a day. The night didn’t have darkness: for it is being lit by the godly word, as the saying of David : and the night is the light of my food, as the darkness is not darkening from You, and the night like the day is lit. How much goodness lights the church, throwing light on her, like a crown of beauty worthy of kingly crowns, it was given by the God of the universe. 
 From a good root springs a good branch. When I say this, to the twin brothers and to a kingly agreement I sing the godly word of the truth: brother is helped by a brother, as the city is strong, and as the kingdom is fortified. These are the two dark olives, as standing before God of all the earth, the flowers of honor, the pillars of truth, supporting the church, because Christ is supporting the kingdom. I see the branches with the roots of the blessed king, shining with the children: the glory of the righteous is not dead, the righteous will be in eternal memory. Do you see how He? is shining with his image? An image not without soul, but with an alive image. I look at the anticipation, and I fear/wonder: how all is scattered by the fighting monster, to the faithful great king . The faith of that father is supporting the children of the kingdom. God leads that king, and leads his offspring, for from the same good root they grew. Let us pray, brothers, to keep the lamps of Christian good-ranking, the branches of olive, two lamps of the honor, supports of the church. But let no one think that the words are flattery, but true things. If he says, the man is supporting the church? And much so. Or don’t you know that God gave much to the man, and asks little from us: he gave manna in the desert, and asks for bread from the priest, saying: put on the table bread before Me. He gave a pillar of fire, saying: put a lamp before Me. He gives the source of light and lends the lamp, and with it I give, I show the abundance, and with it serve, fulfill the gratefulness.
 Let the church be first again lit by? the holy fathers. But the words should see a measure: don’t say a measure to the word, but listen. Because your bodies are weary from easy effort, it needs to measure the word, and here to form it, and to be lit with godly grace. Let the Holy Trinity thus lit us, the father’s ministry over all the abundance of the church. And how flowery and color-worked is the priestly (lit. church) dress, reflecting the sun’s ray, and lighting the walls, and the carpets and the standing people. And whatever the color of the goodness will be, it will make the color-work of the air, either golden, or green, or red, or whatever the art of the color-work is adorned with, so the church sometimes receives the ray of prophecy, sometimes the action of the Gospel’s grace, as it stands according to the prophetic voice, shining with colorful garments, as it is said: a queen is presented to Your right hand, in golden garments adorned. Why she was presented? Paul is saying the truth, saying, She was presented to himself as a glorious church, not having stains or wrinkles or anything else. Let it be to us, brothers, to be lit by the godly grace, and to give glory to the Holiest God, as it is fitting all glory, honor, power, magnificence, forever and ever. Amen.