Today, my beloved, I'd like to praise the day of the Lord, which is honoured by many, but also maltreated by many, which rather is honoured by God, but maltreated by man. Why, o man, do you maltreat the day honoured by God? Why do you transgress eternal boundaries that God set? Why do you break his laws? You took off the old man and his actions. Why do you hasten to take it on (again)? Now don't do in the day of the Lord that of your belly, but that of the heavenly kingdom. Do not enter the countryside or the vineyards on it, but come quickly to the churches and the martyria on it! Do not sow earthly seeds on it, but produce spiritual deeds on it. Do not beat a ploughing cow on it, but pray and beat your soul on it. Mimic that collector of tolls who beat his heart and opened the door of clemency, who went up to the temple as sinner and came down as righteous, who went up wounded and came down healed. He went up carrying sins and came down clothed in righteousness, he went up black like a raven and came down white like a dove, he went up to the temple distressed and came down into his own house joyfully.

Now move also yourself, beloved, your hands on the day of the Lord, not that you collect fleshly money, but that you harvest spiritual goods. For God blessed the day of the Lord and santified it. (P has an addition: the seventh day according to the old law; now, he praised and sanctified and praised instead of that day the holy day of the Lord, as in it all the goods came into being: the annuntiation, the birth, the holy and life-giving and gladdening resurrection and all the other things that were mentioned before; and on this day he should come again to judge the living and the dead.) Therefore, he wants praise and not work, he asks for sanctity, not for desire. Praise it by singing hymns, so that God may bless you. Sanctify it through prudence, that he sanctifies you through communion. You have to stop to work one day for God, beloved, each week.

Which day of those do you want not to work, tell me, the day of the Jews or that of the Greek or that of the Christians? For there are three groups in the world: Jews, Greeks, and Christians. The Jews do not work on the sabbath, the Greek do not work on thursday, the Christians do not work on the day of the Lord. With which of those then do you want not to work, tell me? With the Jews? But you are not circumcised. With the Greeks? But you are no idolater. Those, although they are impious, beloved, do not work on their days. And you being Christian despise your day? Persuade the Greek to work on Thursday and I will shut up. Persuade the Jew to work on the sabbath and I won't say anything. Those keep their days against the wish of God; therefore, to a much greater extent, we living according to God's will owe to do that.

So you transgress the law, beloved, if you work the seven days. And that it is a transgression of law, God confirms by teaching: On the six days you will do , he says, your works. But on the seventh you will do no work at all. The day of the Lord is a day of rest. It is a day of rest from work by the reasonable and by the unreasoning: Your cattle, your male and female servants, your ass, and your tenants should rest on it, beloved. Grant them rest on the day of the Lord, that you may rest on the great day of resurrection (P: judgement). Your cattle and your ass will praise the one who granted them the day of the Lord to rest. And as the speechless animals speak, if God wills, therefore the ass that carried Balaam complains: Why do you beat me, it says, unjustly? I see an angel standing on the road with a two-edged dagger. Get down and do reverence to him , he says, that we possibly may not both get killed. 
 
 The ass talked, that the synagogue gets silent. The mouth of the ass was opened, that the mouth of the Jews and the haeretics gets blocked. For the mouth of those speaking unjust words , it says, were blocked. The ass spoke, since it was beaten unjustly. Do not beat your cattle that works on the day of the Lord, that it may not turn round and then say to you: Why do you beat me? You are not allowed to work today! Perhaps you have respect for me, if I say that, beloved! If you have no respect, . For even if the remedy is bitter, it is still beneficial for the treatment. Even if the iron is sharp, but it cuts off the putrid limbs. The teacher is harsh to the child, too, but from him it receives wisdom. Likewise is the opponent awe-inspiring for the athlete, but through him he receives the crown of victory and the prize. So the teachings appear hard to the hearers, but they are guided by them to the truth.

Therefore, do not transgress the commandment of God by working on the day of the Lord! Do not despise that commandment! For on that commandment heaven and earth hang . And do not unfasten one of the commandments! For blindness afflicted in part Israel. Do not despise the small leaven. For it says, that a little leaven leavens all the lump . Also the eating from the tree seemed small to Adam, beloved, but it got him out of that great glory. Another one in turn died untimely, because he took hold of the ark at the wrong time. Again another one concealed a small golden tongue under his belongings and was burned. Again another one, because he took food from the sacrifice at the wrong time, his hand withered. Again two others, because they used censers at the wrong time, were swallowed by the earth. For the earth opened, it says, and swallowed Dathan and Abiron. Because they performed their own work, they were delayed. That's why their sacrifice was not accepted.

Therefore, stay, beloved, on the holy day of the Lord in the church! Learn, how the schools of children are begging on the day of the Lord! Learn, how the assemblies of the soldiers rest on the Lord's day! Learn, how the thrones of the rulers mourn on the Lord's day! The thrones of those mourn, but the throne of Christ shines. Nobody sees a child stretched out by teachers on the day of the Lord. Nobody sees someone beaten by the tribune on the day of the Lod. Nobody finds someone condemned on the holy day of the Lod. Everybody waits for the day of the Lord, like those on watch wait for the detachment, like the calves bound to stakes. Everybody waits for the day of the Lord, like the schools of the children wait for the release. Everybody waits for the day of the Lord, like the lambs wait in their pen for the release. Everybody waits for the day of the Lord, like the dead wait for the resurrection. Therefore, let us keep with joy and exaltation, beloved, the day of the Lord and let us bring on it a living holy sacrifice, deeds of righteousness, fruits of love for the poor, prayers, readings, and let us praise the father and the son and the holy ghost, the one kingdom and divinity, now and for ever and into all eternity. Amen.